---
layout: layouts/base.njk
menu:
  visible: true
  title: 📚 Reading List
  order: 1
---

## Reading List

<div class="notice">
    ⚠️ <b>NOTICE</b>

    Much of the fiction I recommend is for adults, containing violence and other
    adult themes. I shouldn't have to put this notice here, but here it is.
</div>

Some of the books I have read end up on this page.

### Fiction

**After Life** by Simon Funk, 2006. [Available
here](https://sifter.org/simon/AfterLife/index.html). A digital trip. No
description given. None possible. ★★★★★ (5/5)

**No Country For Old Men** by Cormac McCarthy, 2005. Requires no introduction.
You may well have seen the excellent film, you should make the effort to read
the excellent book. Viceless prose. ★★★★★ (5/5)

**Permutation City** by Greg Egan, 1994. Think of copies of yourself in a
simulation. Treads more in moral philosophy at times. Very dry. Very innovative.
Worth the effort! ★★★★★ (5/5)

**Snow Crash** by Neal Stephenson, 1992. It's an upgraded *Neuromancer*, written
in a more amusing fashion, and in my view predicted the future better than a lot
of other Sci-Fi novels. The word "metaverse" came from this book!
Only missing a star because the ending was a bit unsatisfying. ★★★★☆ (4/5)

**Neuromancer** by William Gibson, 1984. The book that kickstarted modern
cyberpunk books. Think of cyberpunk, you're thinking of this book.
Missing a star because the writing can be a little bit dry. ★★★★☆ (4/5)

**On The Road** by Jack Kerouac, 1957. Kerouac was one of the original Beat
Generation writers, named because they viewed themselves as beaten by a
consumerist, decadent society. I put it under Fiction even though it's a
roman à clef based on Jack Kerouac and Neal Cassady's journeys across America.
★★★★☆ (4/5)

**A Very British Coup** by Chris Mullin, 1982. A window into 1980s political
intrigue. I don't usually recommend political thrillers, but this is a good
example of the genre. ★★★★☆ (4/5)

**Daemon** and **Freedom** by Daniel Suarez, 2006 and 2010. Written by an
engineer, the story of a dead man's AI curse unleashed on the world, highly
innovative, but mildly inconsistent at times. ★★★☆☆ (3/5)

**Ready Player One** by Ernest Cline, 2011. A love letter to video games and
1980s culture, set in a world so crappy that most people seek to escape it
through the OASIS, a virtual reality MMORPG. Interesting premise, but I'm
removing a few stars because of its reliance on 1980s culture. ★★★☆☆ (3/5)

### Non-Fiction

**Masters of Doom** by David Kushner, 2003. Incredibly well-researched book on a
games company called Id Software, which created the Doom and Quake franchises.
If you want to understand gaming culture, read this book. ★★★★★ (5/5)

**Make Something Wonderful: Steve Jobs in his own words** by the Steve Jobs
Archive, 2023. Selected writings and correspondence from Steve Jobs, need I say
more? ★★★★★ (5/5)

**Homage to Catalonia** by George Orwell, 1938. George Orwell actually fought in
the Spanish Civil War on the side of the Republicans, for which he received a
gunshot wound in the throat by a Nationalist sniper, after which he escaped to
France after the Republican authorities arrested members of the organisation he
fought alongside. Moving accounts of personal bravery. A solid 5/5. ★★★★★ (5/5)

**Gaia: a new look at life on Earth** by James Lovelock, 1979. This book changed
how I view the environment and by extension shaping the environment. Lovelock's
work on sensors paved the way to banning CFCs, allowing the Ozone layer to heal.
This book takes this thinking a step further by positing that the Earth can be
viewed as a self-regulating system. Controversial, but only to those who haven't
read the book well enough. ★★★★★ (5/5)

**Down And Out in Paris and London** by George Orwell, 1933. It's a memoir of
how the poor truly lived, intended to show the middle and upper classes what
poverty is really like. Orwell actually gave up a post as a policeman in Burma
to write this book. ★★★★☆ (4/5)

**The Outsider** by Colin Wilson, 1956. This book explores the concept of the
outsider personality, unwilling and unable to conform to the mainstream of
society. Uses a variety of sources, from Franz Kafka to Friedrich Nietzsche.
Interesting, but loses a few points because the author treats his own positions
on outsideness as self-evident truths. ★★★☆☆ (3/5)
